> That may be a silly example, but it makes a lot of sense to me and I
> could see making use of that property.  I guess my next question
> then would be related to efficiency: isn't there a lot of copying
> going on if you've got to make a new instance of your symbol table
> just to add an element?  How does this work out in practice?

That's where you need clever algorithmicians such as Chris Okasaki to
design persistent data structures with efficient operations --
ideally, as efficient as for equivalent non-persistent data structures
(i.e. modified in place).

To continue Jean-Christophe's symbol table example, persistent
dictionaries can be implemented by balanced binary trees (as in the
OCaml library module "Map").  Then, adding an entry to a symbol table
requires at most one branch of the tree to be copied, which takes time
and space O(log n); the other branches of the tree are simply shared
between the original and the modified symbol tables.

If you have efficiency concerns, it is interesting to compare the
Hashtbl and Map modules from the OCaml library.  Both implement the
dictionary data structure, one imperatively, the other in a purely
functional way.  You'll find that Map operations are a bit slower than
Hashtbl operations, but by a factor of 2 or less.  Moreover, the worst
case for maps is still O(log n), while hash tables can degrade to O(n).

For other data structures, it is much harder to achieve good
asymptotic complexity for persistent data structures; that's where the
kind of "tours de force" you see in Okasaki's book come into play.

> Again, I'm not saying efficiency is the only metric for software,
> but it does concern me when I see a large datastructure copied.  Is
> there some sort of reference counted sharing going on, or are there
> actually two copies of the data in memory if you wrote your example
> in caml?

Sharing is the key.  The beauty of immutable data structures is that
sharing is always safe.  With well-designed data structures, this can
lead to a lot more sharing of data in purely functional programs than
what you typically see in imperative programs.

A few more words on persistent, purely functional data structures.
They are very useful in a number of cases:

- When your application really needs to "go back in time".  Examples:
the "back" button on a Web browser; the "undo" facility of a text
editor; version control systems such as RCS or CVS; etc.  Of course,
you can implement this by state + undo logs, but after a while the
structure of the undo logs become quite complex and a purely
functional data structure starts to make a lot of sense.

- When your application needs to handle gracefully user interrupts
and unexpected exceptions.  Consider an interactive toplevel loop
such as Caml's.  In Caml Light, the symbol tables were implemented by
mutable hash tables.  Thus, the user could interrupt the system in the
middle of type-checking, when the symbol tables have been partially
updated.  I had to put a rollback mechanism to undo these changes on
user interrupt.  In effet, you need some atomic transaction mechanism.
In OCaml, the symbol tables are purely functional maps, with only one
reference holding the current stable symbol table.  The reference is
updated by one atomic assignment when the user input has been
successfully processed.  You can interrupt the processing at any time,
the system will always be in a consistent state.

- To implement a mathematical specification "to the letter".  E.g. you
have an interpreter, type-checker, proof system, program
transformation, etc, that is specified by inference rules or similar
mathematical notation, and you wish to implement the spec faithfully
and quickly.  Using purely functional data structures, the program is
often a direct transliteration of the specs.  Using imperative data
structures, you have to think more carefully about undoing
modifications at the right time, make sure that there is no sharing,
etc.

- To prove formally properties of a program, especially mechanically
checked proofs.  There are techniques to reason about imperative
programs directly, but often a rewrite to a purely functional style
makes it easier to "import" the program into a proof checker such as
Coq and prove properties about it.

This said, I agree with Chet that there is no reason to get religious
about purely functional data structures.  Use what works best for
you.  And indeed OCaml can support both styles, and its standard
library offers a mixture of functional and imperative data
structures.

- Xavier Leroy

